# Lessons
Lessons learned from the Yuba Forest Business Alliance Project

## Project Overview
The overarching goal of the Forest Business Alliance project was to support healthy, resilient forests and the people and ecosystems that depend on them. With the support of Yuba Water Agency, our project team leveraged statewide, CAL FIRE-funded activities to deepen their impact in Yuba County in particular. The project was built upon three pillars, which together increased the capacity of 1. organizations through technical assistance, 2. individual and organizations through training, and 3. the region through peer learning. These three project elements were particularly chosen to bolster both the short and long-term capacity of a range of forest-health-related organizations and businesses.

## YWA Grant
*How the Yuba Water grant was used* 
Move from big picture above into specific details about the tasks and working with the Yuba Watershed Protection and Fire Safe Council

The Forest Business Alliance project was designed and implemented by a small team with expertise in fields such as forestry, business development, and grant writing. The Yuba Watershed Protection and Fire Safe Council played a critical role as fiscal agent and hub of outreach and technical support activities. 

The project specifically focused on four interconnected tasks: 

1. **Proposal and Business Development Triage**. This task focused on initial outreach to distribute information broadly about the Forest Business Alliance and our offers of support and expertise. We held one-on-one sessions of direct technical assistance, during which team members met with forest-sector business and organization entities to discuss their needs and potential alignment with grant programs. This task also included developing training and guidance materials, such as project, grant and business plan development guidelines and strategies, with accompanying templates and other written material. This has all been made available online and continues to be shared and accessible.   
2. **Workshops**. Throughout the project term, the Forest Business Alliance team provided an array of workshops on topics including project development, grant writing, business plan development, sawmill/plant operation, forest management and business, workforce development, and workshops on these topics tailored to Tribal audiences, e.g., Federally recognized tribal governments and native-led non-profits. The workshops were designed to build skills and knowledge, preparing individuals and entities for successful fundraising and project implementation. Add more detail about topics and number of workshops? Also, links to YouTube channel
3. **Peer-learning Network**. Business owners, non-profit representatives, and individuals engaged with forest-sector activities all came together through the Forest Business Alliance Peer-learning Network (Network). These meetings were largely held via Zoom, with XX\# (two?) held in person. Each meeting started off with a presenter or panel of presenters with expertise on a particular topic. Following the presentation, Network participants joined break-out groups to discuss topics related to the presentation or self-identified topics of interest. Topics of presentations and discussion included \_\__. Forest Business Alliance team members facilitated the meetings and set the stage for sharing and creation of cooperative, mutually supportive relationships among peer network members in a learning-by-doing atmosphere that actively employed expert and field-based knowledge to maximize information exchange, problem-solving, and successful project deployment. 
4. **Management, Reporting, Communications**. Under this task, the Forest Business Alliance team developed reporting materials to share project progress with Yuba Water Agency as well as fiscal agent, Yuba Watershed Protection and Fire Safe Council. This task also included the creation of guidance materials on business and grant development, as well as the data analysis included in this report. The team also created flyers and informational documents to share at forest and fire-related events, such as community events attended by the Yuba Watershed Protection and Fire Safe Council. The team also created a guidebook, available at [forestbiz.info](https://forestbiz.info/intro.html), which includes chapters on CAL FIRE Grants Analysis, Program Design, Proposal Development, Measuring Success, Compliance Pathways, Monitoring, Resilience Gaps (i.e., forest management in low-income communities), and Scaling (i.e., approaches on how to plan and fund scaling business and organizational development for forest health projects).

### Project Impact 
Like many regions up and down the Sierra Nevada range, Yuba County and the Yuba River watershed covers sloping, forested foothills and flatter valley landscapes. The natural forces of water and fire shape these landscapes as do the communities that live on them. These communities range from relatively sparsely populated mountainous areas of largely disadvantaged communities to denser urban zones with higher rates of poverty. These characteristics and conditions can tell us a revealing story about the past, present and future of our lands and communities. 

The Forest Business Alliance team came together to better understand the conditions and needs of Yuba County’s forested landscapes and forest-focused entities and individuals. We then worked to provide targeted, effective assistance. Through the one-on-one triage and guidance activities of Task 1, we found that some organizations were well-poised to pursue and obtain grant funding and implement projects, while others needed technical assistance to simply gain clarity regarding their capacity needs. 

For example, the Yuba Watershed Protection and Fire Safe Council is an active hub in the community, supporting information-sharing and fire risk reduction for individual homeowners and in shared areas, such as roadways. This organization needs, and actively pursues, grant funding and requires ongoing support to ensure its programs are sustainable. 

In contrast, the Yuba Resource Conservation District has been recently regenerated and working hard to gain traction through project identification and development. This organization is a different stage of development and is actively pursuing grants. Strong partnerships are critical for the RCD and collaborative work has been the mainstay of early successes. Forest Business Alliance technical assistance for the RCD focused on one-on-one discussions of project development, potential grant programs, and how to address organizational needs. Ongoing success for the RCD will hinge on continuing collaboration with the Fire Safe Council, the local land trusts, the Forest Service, community-based organizations and individuals, as well as CAL FIRE. The Forest Business Alliance worked with the RCD and other entities to help increase understanding of the project environment and roles that different organizations can play. For example, the Fire Safe Council focuses on home hardening and defensible space within a certain zone around private homes and businesses. Larger entities, such as the Forest Service, are working to maintain forest health on much larger landscapes. An obvious role for the RCD could be focusing on private lands that are beyond the defensible space zone, and adjacent to USFS lands or other large parcels. 

The Forest Business Alliance team met multiple times with Yuba College to discuss their nascent Watershed and Forestry programs. These programs could be instrumental in expanding the Yuba County workforce and fostering long-term partnerships. Creating pathways for students to find and participate in forest-related internships is an important role that the Forest Business Alliance worked to support.

We assisted the Forest Biomass Business Center with project development and review of multiple grant proposals. The biomass facility has been awarded some grant funds for one of the most challenging phases of fundraising—early planning and design for facility establishment and construction. The FBBC is now poised to continue successful fundraising.  

Multiple small business owners requested Forest Business Alliance assistance in reviewing their forest-business related needs such as equipment and contacts and alignment with potential grant programs. 

An additional benefit the Yuba Forest Business Alliance project provided was increasing awareness in the region of bigger picture of resources available for forest health and management. We provided a spreadsheet that was updated regularly of forest-focused grant programs. We offered one-on-one review of projects against grant programs to help determine potential fit. We also discussed multi-partner project opportunities and their alignment with various grant programs and ongoing coordination activities, such as the Yuba Forest Network. 

### Challenges
Although the Yuba region is poised to make significant strides in increasing forest health and coordinated management of the landscape, the Forest Business Alliance team identified several challenges. For example, multiple potential business owners are interested in developing bioenergy facilities that could provide local options for processing woody biomass coming from forest management activities. However, there are significant hurdles to fundraising for these expensive operations and working with PG\&E to establish them. 

Further, the diversity of land ownership in the region—a mosaic of private, federal, and public—makes it challenging to complete projects across a contiguous landscape. Like water, fire doesn’t care about human-made boundaries but working across jurisdictions to develop, fundraise for, and implement projects is a significant challenge. 

Looking for notes about this from informational call with Madison Thomson (one of the few RPFs in the county). Most businesses doing work are coming from out of region…

Overall, the need is huge. Yuba County is a very high risk of severe wildfire. And yet, large-scale forest management, encouraging the use of good fire (and implementing that through prescribed burns), and reducing the risk of catastrophic wildfire requires major, coordinated efforts and myriad smaller, ongoing activities by a range of organizations and individuals. Entities such as the Forest Business Alliance and Yuba Watershed Protection and Fire Safe Council that can provide a hub for learning, information-sharing, and technical assistance can play a vital role in tackling these large needs. 

## Next Steps
Common issues that address forest health in Yuba County are typical in other counties across the state. Some suggested long- and short-term approaches and roles are outlined in the following bullets:

- **Yuba Water Agency**. An important element or role that Yuba Water Agency can play through its Integrated Regional Water Management activities or support of the Fire Safe Council and RCD could be capacity-building to build durable partnerships that help ensure on-the-ground, collaborative work is completed. This work must include various land ownership types and be informed by data and knowledge of fire risk and forest health needs. Working with the community college and organizations such as the Camptonville Community Partnership can help ensure that locals complete the forest management work. Registered professional foresters are a gap that could be partially aided through the community college acting as a feeder to university programs with accreditation or providing the pathway to become an RPF.

- **Gaining momentum**. RCD capacity, Fire Safe Council continued projects and connecting public/private lands.  Long and short-term. Community of practice between private LTOs, nonprofits, and YWA.

- **Treatment areas**. Treat high-priority WUI areas, examine areas that have not burned, and treat key areas that may threaten vulnerable communities in the northwestern portion of the County.

- **Capacity & workforce**. Building capacity and the workforce for forest health projects is one of the County’s biggest opportunities. The Fire Safe Council has started down this road, and the RCD is just beginning. Support to build these organizations and others is warranted. Looking for ways to learn from and build on Camptonville Community Partnership’s efforts, perhaps expanding the work to other county areas could be another venue to strengthen and build capacity. Finally, private forest businesses, RPFs, and LTOs could be expanded or trained throughout the county. As we understand it, many projects depend on outside capacity and organizations to complete forest health projects. Bringing that business within the county would be fantastic. 

- **Funding**. The Fire Safe Council and Camptonville Community Partnership have been consistently successful in garnering grant funding. The Yuba RCD has several opportunities it has pursued, although their capacity to pursue larger or many grants is limited until they can take on more staff. Funding pots could be greatly increased in the region by teaming across organizations within the County and neighboring counties. Collaborative efforts such as the Healthy Eldorado Landscape Partnership and the North Yuba Forest Partnership have successfully raised more funds as a unified effort rather than individual organizations.

Since the water agency already participates in the Yuba Forest Resilience Bond, it is worth developing and pursuing similar collaborative finance opportunities that can leverage private and public funding for forest health and water infrastructure projects. It’s unclear what these could be, but replicating the North Yuba Forest Bond or diversifying funding portfolios with private investment or foundation grants could increase the county's project and organizational capacity.

- **Data**. As the Geospatial Analysis chapter mentioned, more forest-health-specific data would be useful for future projects and the County in general. A final vegetation map, such as those developed in Marin and Sonoma Counties, utilizing Lidar and satellite imagery could be an excellent baseline for a more detailed analysis of the state of Yuba’s forests and provide evidence for the impact of treatments on the future state of forests in the region. Lidar data is now available for the entire Sierra as of 2025 and might make the analysis more financially feasible to conduct. 